hello my name is de memory and it's my
privilege to present once again at
Christopher Simpson the author of among
uttered other titles the science of
coercion blowback and the book that
we're going to be speaking about today
the splendid blonde beast subtitled
money law and genocide in the 20th
century called the chin soft cover by
the common courage press Chris welcome
back once again to our Airways hello
Dave
your book is subtitled money law and
genocide in the 20th century and you
begin your discussion of the
relationship between those things with a
discussion of the Turkish genocide
against the Armenian before getting into
how that actually obtains would regard
to the issue of war crimes per se could
you give us some historical background
about that incident well briefly what
happened is that the Ottoman Empire
which which ruled turkey and also much
of what is today Iraq Iran Saudi Arabia
and so forth fabulously wealthy Empire
was falling apart yeah during the end of
the last century and the major European
powers so wanted a piece of it
the Turkish government or Turkey which
was the the seat of that Empire the
Sultan was was weak and eventually
overthrown by a military junta at the
the hunter took the name Young Turks and
this expression is in our language today
young turks typically means somebody who
is who is cruel and an insurgent type of
personality in any case one of the one
of the aspects of this particular
rebellion was to try to hold the empire
together in part by exterminating
Armenians who are a nationality group in
eastern Turkey their ancestral home is
Mount Ararat in eastern Turkey and how
many of your listeners may have heard of
the book 40 days of Moosa Day which is
an account of the Armenian Turkish
conflict in any case the the
called Young Turks set out to
systematically exterminate Armenians who
may interpret it as a threat during
World War one and they they did this by
first of all rounded up the men in the
villages and putting them to slave labor
building railroads mainly for German
economic interests and then seizing
Armenian villages seizing the women the
children the surviving men and deporting
them on forced marches into what are
today the deserts of northern Iraq and
and Syria and in the process killed at
least a million people even by the Turks
own estimates of the day and some
estimates run one twice as high one of
the one of the noteworthy things about
this particular genocide is what's
happening today
and that is that the the Turkish
government has for 70 years
systematically denied the existence of
this genocide despite proof from
Turkey's own archives and you have a
very large-scale publicity or propaganda
campaign you you know choose your own
word to deny that a genocide took place
one of the one of the characteristics of
this propaganda campaign is that the
Turkish government in dows University
chairs and basically hire so big gives a
large pile of money to a university who
the strings that are attached to the
money is is that they have to hire a
professor who who toes the line as far
as the Turkish government's point of
view on this question is concerned now
those strings are not written down I
mean the need of the university to know
the Turkish government is foolish enough
to put that to paper but but that's
that's
substance of what is taking place you
mentioned too that with regard to the
influence of money on the administration
of law towards genocide that a number of
Western interests saw to with the Turks
were really not brought to justice for
their crimes and again money intended to
affect law with regard to genocide right
right I mean part of the big idea the
overall idea of this book is that is
looking at the development of
international law as it pertains to war
crimes and crimes against humanity and
genocide of course is a crime against
humanity and and arguably the most
horrifying crime against humanity I
[Music]
argue in part that first of all the part
of the engine that drives genocide at
least in some circumstances is
incentives that are created by the
jennife idle government that encourage
ordinary people to persecute their
neighbors by basically by by stealing
their their homes their farms or shops
and so forth you saw this phenomenon
both in Turkey and later in Nazi Germany
so that's one aspect of how money plays
into this and we can talk more about
that if you wish a second aspect of how
money plays into this is that as the
international community attempts to
articulate international law right come
to agreement as to what international
standards of conduct are whether or not
genocide is a crime for example as the
international community attempts to do
that money well
national security interests those types
of factors play a very large role in the
in defining law too we can take a brief
sidetrack is's that you can see
in domestic law in the way that oh
you'll have a regulate say say you have
a industrial abuse of some sort like a
Oh coming out of the United States in
the last century the the railroads were
absolutely notorious for monopoly abuse
and and systematically robbing farmers
because because they had monopoly on
transportation all right well so there
was a big controversy and the government
eventually set up the Interstate
Commerce Commission and this was a
reform and the idea was that this new
body Interstate Commerce Commission was
going to regulate the railroads in such
a way that that the public interests
would be protected so that's that's fine
however with certainly within 20 years
the Interstate Commerce Commission and
the the railroads had grown so
interwoven with each other as to be
practically indistinguishable what what
I do in my book is to in the splendid
wombeast or part of what what is
discussed there is how this same
convergence of interests between the
between the crime and the law can take
place on an international scale and can
also take place in extremely serious
crimes that that would in in any usual
sense of morality or ethics be
horrifying now if you will permit me an
example I realized I've been then going
on in in this particular vein for a
moment but but you can see it in
international law concerning bombing of
cities now as late as 1939 the president
the united states said that aerial
bombing of an undefended city was a war
crime and that a country that that did
such a thing the the the commanders and
so forth should be put on trial for war
crimes this later of course helped to
dampen the appetites of some US
officials to put Nazi war criminals on
trial in World War two for fear of
reprisal against some of our own Airmen
well that's true that's true I think
more fundamentally what you see coming
out of World War two is that the Nazi
style of genocide with the with the gas
chambers and the horrifying roundups and
the the the the terrible mass murder at
the edge of the ditch that kind of
genocide was clearly condemned and and
the world at large acknowledges that
that's a crime the different type of
mass murder namely dropping bombs on
cities or dropping missiles on cities
which is much the same thing was not
only not criminalized it actually became
the foundation of the national security
strategy of both the United States and
eventually the Soviet Union as' as well
so one type of mass murder becomes
criminal and a different type of mass
murder becomes institutionalized and so
part of the book looks at how that
phenomena comes to pass but something
that I'd like to talk about in terms of
the development of how money
specifically influenced the development
of international law concerns something
that you talk about on page 46 and I'd
like to lead a couple of sentences and
then have you explain and develop this
further here on page 46 you write during
the 1970's crisis talking about the
crisis would regard to oil in the 1970s
actually let me start a couple of
sentences up the United States had
emerged
world war 1 with its currency and
industry stronger than ever before at
least as long as Britain and other
debtors continued to pay their bills the
1920s boom driven by imperialism cheap
oil and the emerging automobile economy
in the u.s. created enormous pools of
investment funds in the banks of New
York and Boston this led to an
international financial situation that
was similar in some respects to the
Middle East oil crisis of the 1970s
during the 1970s crisis the central
problem from the standpoint of
international finance was to recycle the
massive pools of funds that had shifted
to the Middle East back to the
international banking network in order
to stave off a string of bankruptcies
that would otherwise have resulted from
a liquidity in the system during the
1970s most of this recycling was carried
out through the yellow euro dollar
market during the second half of the
1920s the most important international
market for recycling the new private US
wealth was Germany I realized this is a
tall order Chris but if you could
explain briefly the euro dollar
situation and then how that related to
the US and German situation in the 1920s
right right in soundbite
ad in soundbite form of 30 seconds or
less I mean this is the part of part of
the difficulty with any kind of
discussion like this and and really part
of the difficulty with media is how does
one explain the the complexity the
real-world complexity of history when
almost all of the conversation has to be
reduced to two sentences that are you
know six or seven words long or
understood is that this particular
connection is so central to development
of your thesis right right you know I'm
not trying to you know dump on you Dave
I'm what I'm trying to get at is that is
that as a society we've got a problem
with in which are very misunderstanding
are the very myths by which we live are
to a certain extent structurally built
in to the way that we communicate with
each other um so anyway on the banking
question well I think we can we can do
even more content
for even than the 1970s euro dollar
crisis and that is what's going on today
with with international finance and the
situation is somewhat different today
for for a whole string of reasons but
but the the element similarity is this
that banks lend money to each other they
lend money to businesses and this is how
you know finance works fine as long as
the money keeps flowing as long as it
keeps moving around well then you know
everybody who wears a suit to work goes
home at night and sleeps in peace what
I'm trying to say is is that the the
system has the appearance of efficiency
it has the appearance of operating well
but what happens when either because of
a crisis in in the ability of companies
to pay back their loans or a glut a kind
of a clog or if you not to be too crude
about it it's sort of a form of economic
constipation steps in in which the money
doesn't doesn't flow through the system
in the same way and what happens then is
that you get a string of bankruptcies
one sort of falls against the next
against the next against the next and
that is what we've been seeing over the
last at least two years now
starting with with very little noticed
and practically unreported a series of
bankruptcies in Thailand and then that's
spreading through Asia and then into
into Russia and into South America and
increasingly into Europe it Canada for
example has been suffering from this for
some time and and so forth and so on
and so the point being is
that illiquidity that's the term a
clogging up of the circulation of
capital money brings the system to a
halt now in the 1970s crisis what
happened was is that OPEC for a few
years was extremely effective and the
jump in the price of oil meant that huge
pools of money ended up in the hands of
particularly Saudi Arabia Iran and
several other countries the and there
was a very real threat or concern at the
time that the whole international
banking system would come unraveled
because the Saudis couldn't spend their
money fast enough to keep the to keep
the capital circulating through banks
around the world
so the euro dollar which hadn't
previously existed was is a capital
market in which US dollars are bought
and sold and went and traded and
invested in in using European currencies
and serving primarily European or
international customers and so this was
the way that the log jam was broken
now the bankers in your audience will
will point out that that's a pretty
large oversimplification of what took
place and it is but but the but the
basic point is found is that when the
financial system becomes clogged that
way it comes apart it unravels it shuts
itself down and so that unless there is
a means to break that that log jam then
there's there's a economic crisis that
can spread worldwide now in the 1920s
you had somewhat the same situation the
Americans had participated in World War
one at the very end and the
you know despite all the patriotic songs
and all of that and the number of
casualties among the American forces
were were really quite low there was no
damage to the American industrial base
and both the American banks and
companies came out of the war very much
ahead of where they had been previously
before the war America while it was
powerful and particularly powerful in
Central America was second third or
fourth place well behind the United
Kingdom as far as world empires was
concerned well behind the French
arguably behind the Germans as well I
mean a big part of what was going on in
World War one is that the Germans had
had decided that they wanted an empire
like the like the British and couldn't
see any reason why they shouldn't have
it and went to war to get it I'm black
I'm blonde razn amazing blazing the Sun
yeah yeah yeah yeah uh but as things
happened and as things happen with
imperial wars number one the main price
was not paid by the by the people who
put the you know who set the war off
mean price was paid by ordinary people
both in terms of blood and in terms of
dollars uh and number two the the
empires were enormous Lee weakened the
Russian Empire the Sarris system was
overthrown there was a there was a
communist revolution the
austro-hungarian Empire which had been
previously weakened come to an end and
there was very near nearly a communist
revolution in Hungary and in Germany the
Germany was deeply transformed by World
War One for obvious reasons even England
the the the extensible victor in the war
only came to victory by the
doing what by borrowing money from the
Americans in the same way with the
French borrowing money from the
Americans now meanwhile Germany was the
enemy so they weren't borrowing money
from the Americans but when they lost
the war the British and the French and
other powers went to Germany and said
you have commit and said with some
justice by the way you have committed
war crimes against our people you've
destroyed our ships and planes and home
we're not planes but ships and homes and
hospitals and so forth and therefore you
must pay war damages and they they
haggled over the over the price tag for
this but when when haggling was over it
came down to something on the order of
25 billion dollars now where were the
Germans going to get this sort of money
the the first thing that they tried to
do was through a system that amounted in
in essence to simply printing new
Reichsmarks printing new currency and
then using that to pay the the
reparations and that in the result of
that was the the well-known German
inflation crisis of the 1920s where
people were you know pushing around the
German banknotes and wheelbarrows in
order to do their their grocery shopping
meanwhile the extensible victors of the
war they were trying to they had
obligations to pay their bills to and so
what they would do is they would try to
get reparations from Germany and then
take that those reparations and then pay
the bills to the American banks and in
that way keep this cycle of capital
moving keep it revolving in the same
sense that we see in we were speaking of
just a you know a few moments ago about
the 1970s problem or the 1990s problem
well the
[Music]
when it came around to repaying the
Americans what was happening were big
clogs of money in the banks in New York
and in Boston in somewhat the same way
we saw in the big clogs of money in the
Middle East after the after the jump in
oil prices so what were they going to do
with this money how were they going to
invest it in you know I mean this is the
this is a capitalist system they have to
turn the money around they have to make
money with money in order for the system
to continue to continue turning over so
to speak the engine continued to turn
you over to use a metaphor and what they
did with it primarily was a system by
which they took the money from the
American banks and lent it back to the
Germans who then used it to do what
amounted to well they did some City
reconstruction with it of cities that
have been damaged by the war but even
more what they did was what would today
be called leveraged buyouts where a a
German entrepreneur Fredrik flicker to
name only one example would get cheap
money from the Americans
and buy his competitors in the steel and
coal and iron business and build himself
up into sort of the Bill Gates of the
lee iaccoca of that particular era and
then and then he you know would would be
forced to to come up with some means of
of paying back those loans and much of
that he took out of it out of the hides
of the people who worked for the coal
and steel industries that he had that he
had bought so did too you know to to
sort of sum up all this see when you
when you've got a perhaps it applies to
any sort of international economic
system but it certainly applies to a
and international economic system that
is built on capitalism in a sense of
capital moving to be invested in to make
profit on capital when it gets clogged
up it breaks down the system breaks down
and when the system breaks down it
causes a big crisis when the first thing
that that the you know these sort of
masters of industry the the bankers and
so forth try to do is to figure out a
way to profitably reinvest it to keep
the system from breaking down I happen
to live and work in Washington DC and
not long ago there was a there were big
meetings of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund trying to
figure out what they had to do with the
with the world economic crisis as it
exists today you've never seen so many
limousines in your life the the the city
was particularly the the major hotels
was absolutely wall-to-wall with with
limousines and and people who supposedly
are concerned with dealing with with
curing international poverty in these
sort of things but who whose personal
lifestyles tend to be extremely opulent
trying to figure out what to do with
with the current clogging up or the
current constipation if you will of the
international monetary system and not
surprisingly they had at least so far
they do not appear to have succeeded at
their task we're going to be talking
about how this how the recapitalisation
of Germany in the 1920s by some of the
top institutions and some of the top
individuals associated with a Wall
Street elite obtained on the issue of
genocide and specifically how later some
of these same figures came to see the
prosecution of Nazi war crimes as a poor
idea under the circumstances of
realpolitik that obtained at the time
we're going to deal with that however in
our next half hour we've been speaking
with Christopher Simpson the author of
among other titles the signs of coercion
blowback the splendid blonde beast which
we've been talking about in Chris you
have a new title that's just out in
which you've edited the works about uh
the universities and Empire yeah yeah it
deals with it deals with where ideas
come from it deals with how
intellectuals work in uh modern
societies and it its title very quickly
because we're almost out of time
universities an empire by the new press
from New York hardcover and we will be
dealing with that in a future broadcast
but they in our next half hour we're
going to get to the subject of how some
of these events obtained on events that
not only related to World War two but
had a profound influence on the course
of the Cold War for Christopher Simpson
this is dave emery saying thanks for
listening hello my name is dave emery
and if my privilege once again to
present christopher simpson the author
of among other titles blowback the
science of coercion and the book that
we're speaking about today the splendid
blonde beast subtitled money law and
genocide in the 20th century published
in softcover but a common courage press
and copyright 1995 chris welcome back
once again to our airwaves hello Dave in
a last half-hour we were talking about
the recapitalisation of Germany in the
1920s by American financial institutions
to a considerable extent in order to
keep the international financial capital
international capital flows going I'd
like to talk about some of the
institutions and individuals that were
central to not only that
recapitalization but a lot of subsequent
events that you talk about let's start
with Sullivan and Cromwell and the the
Brothers of Dulles Allen is the brothers
tell us well the the the conclusion that
we we left off with was that that if the
international financial flow of capital
becomes clogged up then the whole system
breaks down well then the next question
is as well sort of is is who's in charge
of the plumbing you know who keeps it
who keeps the plumbing open and the fact
is is that particularly during the 1920s
you had a really quite small number of
people who special
in this particular task we're talking
about fewer than 200 people worldwide
who were international lawyers senior
executives of of national banks of a
handful of powerful countries and so on
Sullivan and Cromwell was a law firm in
New York is a law firm in New Yorker
remains very powerful today that
specialized in putting together
international deals and and had sort of
pioneered this whole concept of a
multinational corporation back in the
mid 1900s after World War 1 what
happened was that John Foster Dulles was
a lawyer but he was also a banker and
his uncle was Secretary of State and his
you know other relatives were very
well-placed and and so on and as things
came to pass Dulles so was on the
American negotiating team that they put
together the settlement at the financial
settlement at the end of World War one
talk about John Foster Dulles now these
were the elder brother
and these ultimately yielded the Dawes &
Young plan exactly exactly and as we
spoke before the first thing that that
the first attempt to to resolve who was
going to pay for World War one led to
the German inflation crisis of the early
1920s which very nearly set off a new
world war just by itself what John
Foster Dulles put together with a number
of other bankers was the system by which
the the the Germans would borrow money
to repay the loans to England and so
forth which would then take that money
and repay the loans to the Americans who
in turn would lend it to the Germans and
who in turn would pay back the British
who would pay back the Americans who
would lend it to the Germans and and you
see the how the cycle works and as long
as the cycle in
News John Foster Dulles was seen as as
you know the the visionary captain of
world finance $1 and a handful of others
Paul Nitze who who is was later to to
reemerge in during the Cold War's very
important American called warrior sort
of realpolitik advisor to a half a dozen
American presidents John Foster Dulles
ended up the Secretary of State his his
brother Allen ended up as at the same
time as as director of CIA the several
of the the main financial empires that
Dulles served his family was wealthy in
its own right but but his real job was
was serving the the ultra rich the
Harriman's for example the Rockefellers
and so on and these really quite small
circles worked together to to
recapitalize Germany to to you know to
to to profit off of the the Roaring
Twenties boom of that time now and they
set up a variety of different plans that
that ended up taking advantage of small
investors when the bottom fell out of
the market in 1929 but that's kind of
another story as far as what happened
with Germany is concerned is that you
had a had a half a dozen or so of these
early multinational corporations I mean
the idea of a multinational corporation
in a world where where transportation is
slow and making a cross-country
telephone call is almost impossible a
multinational corporation in that kind
of circumstances is is quite an
undertaking
in the 1920s and 1930s what it led to
was a half a dozen or so multinational
corporations and bound together the
financial elite of Wall Street on the
one hand with a financial indeed of
Germany on the other and this was a this
is a very well documented process it's
there's nothing conspiratorial about it
in the sense of you know some some you
know kind of vast uh uh you know
Illuminati banker or Jewish
quote-unquote conspiracy type the story
no there was nothing there's nothing a
cult about this this is one of the major
capital phenomena and it's how the
system works
it's how the system works and far from
being a Jewish banking conspiracy as
we're about to see this ultimately led
to the concretization of the exact
opposite or exactly exactly it it one of
the is this was this ended up as a
contributing factor to the Holocaust and
here's why is that part of one of the
most important questions at the end of
World War one was what is a crime
against humanity what is a war crime and
the reason that was important of course
is the moral question and it's also the
fact that at the end of World War one
that ordinary people were were more and
more involved in the in the life and and
the Democratic character of their
countries than ever before in history
and because it's it was very expensive
because all of the players agreed that
if a country had committed a war crime
then it was responsible for paying some
form of reparation for that crime so the
definition of what a war crime was or
the definition of what a crime against
humanity was became an economic question
in a dent in addition to being a legal
question and a moral question people
like John Foster Dulles and and the
Oh his brother Alan well his brother
Alan yes and perhaps as many as two
dozen other people had a very strong
interest in limiting the definition of
war crime to the maximum degree possible
and obliterating canceling refusing to
acknowledge that there was such a thing
as a crime against humanity why it's
because because of the financial
interest of the of the institutions that
they represented for four reasons that
we've been discussing for a while and in
the particular case of a crime against
humanity
there was concern and they wrote it down
quite explicitly in in Diaries and so
forth that that if for example the
Turkish attempt to exterminate the
Armenians was recognized as a crime as
it certainly should have been and in
fact as the Americans had promised that
it would be during the war that once if
this was recognized at the end of the
war once the proper war propaganda was
over then it was quite likely that the
Americans themselves would find
themselves in the dock for a crime
against humanity in connection with
slavery with the with the extermination
of indigenous peoples with the their
role in mass murders in the Philippines
at the turn of the century and a whole
list of other of other offenses that I
imagine your your listeners are familiar
with so the john foster dulles of the
world and again we're talking about a
very small number of people here had a
great interest in limiting the
definition of these crimes so when
Hitler came to power and when the
extermination of the you know the first
things that he did as far as a
persecution of Jews were dispossessing
Jews taking away their property taking
away their ability to make a living
peddi persecution petty quote/unquote in
the
sense of expelling them from schools or
from professions beating them up that
type of thing and those are serious
crimes yet they are of a different order
than then mass murder as the Nazi state
moved from this quote/unquote petty form
of of persecution which was evil enough
into an extermination esteem
this was this was a relatively public
event I mean people who were reading
European newspapers are reading German
newspapers had a pretty good idea of
what was going on um and so the question
came up in in in the legal advisors
office of the US State Department legal
advisors office in the foreign foreign
office of the United Kingdom well are we
going to intervene as Nazi Germany
Deportes a certain categories of people
to concentration camps which are by
evidence already in our hands actually
death centers where people are starved
to death are left to die from the
elements now this is before the gas
chambers and the answer that the lawyers
came back with was no we're not going to
intervene we're not going to to to get
involved in this why it's because it's
not illegal there's no such thing as a
crime against humanity
we decided that at the end of World War
one
if Hitler wants to treat his people like
that well then maybe Hitler's a
distasteful person but he's not doing
anything against the law this was the
the reasoning at the time I'm not trying
to defend this I'm simply trying to
articulate what the story was or what
the claim was at the time this line of
argument centred on a group of State
Department functionaries who could be
said to be sort of a correlating element
to some of the Wall Street elite that we
were speaking about earlier
brothers dollars and so absolutely
absolutely they were very much
intertwine with each other and and once
again this is not like some sort of
Illuminati conspiracy BS I mean this you
you take you you can sit down and and
look at the foreign uh uh you know the
the staffs of the safety State the
Foreign Service of the of the United
States State Department and and the you
know the kind of the the graduate list
from Princeton and and the the lawyers
from Wall Street and and so forth and
see enormous familial overlap people
moving through revolving door type jobs
and so forth we're talking by the way
about the region faction within the
State Department and I think a better
way of understanding how they function
is to I'll substitute the term
networking for a conspiracy
sure sure networking is awaited to look
at it in a certain in in in one way it
makes a lot of sense I mean if if
there's only a handful if there's a
relative handful of people on Wall
Street who are used to dealing with
Germans and with the German economy and
those know up from down as far as
various parts of Europe are concerned
then it's not surprising that the that
some of those same folks will end up at
least in some administration's in posts
whether representing the US government
in dealing with Europe and in fact
somewhat the same phenomena it continues
to this day
um at that time it was particularly
intense and particularly inbred and
particularly small and tight circles no
in part because in a metaphorical sense
the world was a smaller place in those
days so that rather than having kind of
a
sort of a stratum of people doing these
jobs you really had a country club full
of these people doing these jobs and
that was about it
but to get back to the genocide question
they had to find war crime in a certain
way at the end of World War one mainly
because it was profitable for them to do
it that way and they had refused in the
face of great popular outcry at the time
to accept the to recognize that there
was such a thing as a crime against
humanity such a thing as a crime which a
government commits against its own
citizens for example it's one type of
crime against humanity such a thing as
genocide or a crime in which a state
sets out to exterminate an entire people
even though they had seen that with
their own eyes in the Turkish attempt to
exterminate the Armenians and even
though they had documented that with you
know in their own archives again in the
Turkish attempt to exterminate the
Armenians from a legal standpoint that
crime was said not to exist so that when
Hitler came along his ability to first
of all set the foundation for mass
extermination of Jews and and eventually
of other peoples as well and to begin
the process of that extermination was uh
it was it was shored up it was helped
out it's not too much to say by people
particularly in the in the legal
advisors offices of the State
Department's and foreign ministries that
said hands off don't get involved this
is none of our business
this is there's no basis in
international law to to even make a
protest over this and that that theory
of how international law should work
remain the dominant theory um you know
certainly up till the International
Tribunal at Nuremberg and and continues
to be felt in in a variety of ways to
this day a couple of sentences that I'd
like to read about the political
philosophy of the region grew who again
was sort of a State Department element
that correspond to some of the Wall
Street operators that we alluded to
earlier on page 52 of the paperback
edition you write more to the point here
however is the region groups impact on
us German relations particularly after
Hitler came to power perhaps the most
influential proponent of the region's
inside the government during the
Roosevelt years was FDR's first time
basa dur to Moscow William bullet by the
way that's with two L's an eye and two
T's he arrived in the USSR full of
enthusiasm for normalized us-soviet
relations but he felt soon after
convinced quote that only Nazi Germany
could stay the advance of Soviet
Bolshevism into Europe on quote a view
that was shared by others such as a
people like Robert Murphy and then later
you write again of the same type of
faction on their attitudes towards war
crimes would regard to the Germans use
of slave labor vote for them forced
labor seemed little more than a
particularly harsh solution to problems
that were common to us and German elites
Chris we've got just about ten minutes
left in the interview and I'd like to
develop those points a little further
and talk about how people like Robert
Murphy George Kenan of that region
faction and later people like Allen
Dulles and William Draper came to be
involved with seeing to the
reconstruction of Germany after World
War two in effect at a situation not
unlike what had happened after World War
one right right well en I realize this
is a tall order for genuine right sure I
mean we were talking earlier about how
quite a number of empires came to an end
during World War one and one of them of
course was that of Tsarist Russia whose
government was overthrown by a communist
revolution
now the
the big capitalists uh the big business
the social leaders the chambers of
commerce and so forth were appalled by
this development it's because this kind
of class-based struggle had been a
characteristic of America for for 40 50
years at that point the IWW the Wobblies
were a potent political force in the
United States at that time the labor
unions were in many cases virtually
illegal in the United States and and
along comes a movement that says labor
should rule well so the US government
was was not happy with with this so you
had growing in the State Department a
particular analysis of how do you
respond to Bolshevik Russia what do you
do with them and you had some people who
favored dealing with the Soviet Russia
more or less as a conventional power and
in establishing more or less
conventional diplomatic relations and
you had others who's a strategy was to
to systematically undermine and attempt
to overthrow that particular government
the the latter group were were called
the region or the riga faction that
particular term was coined by a very
mainstream american historian Daniel
Yergin who wrote up a quite a good study
of the emergence of this group okay
Rahl so who was in this group while you
had people who like George Kennan who is
with us today who remains the big deal
you know the so-called wise man that
that were very influential in u.s.
Soviet policy after 1945 some of you
write extensively about in blowback sure
sure
Robert Murphy
who was Assistant Secretary of State and
under three or four different
presidential administrations and at one
point was a acting Secretary of State
and so on a man very influential as far
as a u.s. international relations are
concerned and in a core group of more or
less similar thinking people in in the
State Department whose specialty was
dealing with Eastern Europe and bullets
as you read was one of them and bullet
that it was sent to when Roosevelt came
to power one of the things that he did
was that what was to attempt to reopen
rational or more or less conventional
diplomatic relations with the Soviets
and it was a particularly hard time to
do that it's because for one thing the
United States was any economic crisis
for another thing the Soviet Union was
in the midst of a was of a major land
and class upsurge which in the end
turned a rather bloody in quite a number
of places Stalin was solidifying his
power and you know so forth and so on so
creating normal diplomatic relations was
not a particularly easy job on top of
that the revolutionary core that that
had brought the Communists to power or
the revolutionary ideals put it that way
that the Communists had been able to to
articulate and on that basis to win
power and win popular support they they
had yet to turn sour in the minds of
many people and so literally millions of
people around the world look to the
Soviet Union as the model of a new
society a new world a better way of life
and so forth and so on
now you know the there's been a lot of
water under the bridge since then and
I'm not sure in fact I'm quite sure that
that that's that's not the way the
Soviet Union the Soviet Union doesn't
even exist anymore but but the point is
is that at that time it that was the way
it appeared so when bullet went there
bullet was very much a sign of the of
the ruling class a ruling elite however
you want to put it
he went there was Roosevelt's emissary
with an idea of establishing more or
less rational relations with the Soviets
and then he returned literally within
months saying that the only the only
thing to do with the Soviets was to
encourage the Nazis to go to war with
them and in that particular trend of
thinking remained entrenched and
dominant really in the US State
Department throughout the 1930s
throughout Hitler's rise and throughout
Hitler's consolidation of power you
mentioned that there was a struggle
within the US State Department between
this riga faction a pronounced regal
region riga is the correct location
anyway the riga faction and those who
were attempting to administer the polish
that had actually been in the policies
that have been enunciated by people like
franklin roosevelt ultimately the robert
Murphy's in the riga faction prevailed
and he mentioned that would regard to
the administration of intelligence in
germany Allen Dulles of Sullivan and
Cromwell who drew was working for OSS
became the primary u.s. functionary and
at the same time another member of this
Wall Street elite who was wearing
another national security hat
William Draper of Dylan Reed became a
key US official regard to of frustrating
the decarbonization of Germany in our
last couple of minutes I wonder if you
could uh as briefly as possible detail
at for us bearing in mind the
possibility of really doing that justice
okay wanting basically what you had half
as what we've been seeing so far as is
the emergence of this small relatively
small circle of people who specialized
in us-german relations and and also in
this kind of pry angular relationship
between the United States Germany and
the Soviet Union and those three
relationships were really very important
as far as American foreign policy for
Europe was concerned throughout the
1930s 1930s 1940s and so on and and
we're talking about a relative handful
of people who make the decisions about
what's going to be done there the the
ones who are making the decisions in the
1920s about banking and investment were
by the 1940s the ones who were in charge
of the in some cases in charge of parts
of the American war effort against the
Nazi government and then after Hitler
was gone in charge of the American
occupation of Germany when all of the
very complicated questions involving how
do you do not Sofia country that has
been a Nazi come to any enthusiastic by
the way Nazi country for for almost two
decades how do you dean ossify that sort
of situation how do you reconstruct
germany how do you put a country back on
its feet so it can survive economically
and so forth and so on he says a not
easy questions to answer and the the
ones who had the appearance of being
experts at answering these questions
were precisely the ones who had been
personally involved in creating the
economic and political conditions that
had led to to Hitler's rise to power who
had participated in business deals with
major German companies during Hitler's
rule and who in many cases had personal
or familial economic interests and
companies that that were
fitting from Germany's reconstruction
William Draper's had one example that
you use and he by the way was a where
we're almost out of time he was a via
General at the end of the war and he had
been a key official with Dylan read in
helping to promote US investment in
Germany and then as I said Allen Dulles
from Sullivan and Cromwell had a lot to
do with administering intelligence
matters and of course Allen Dulles and
people like George Kennan and others
figure prominently in your book blowback
which follows in many ways on the work
that you did in splendid blogbeast are
we've been speaking with Christopher
Simpson the author of the vitally
important book the splendid blond beast
money law and genocide in the twentieth
century
published in soft cover by common
courage press copyright 1995 Chris
thanks for being with us thank you Dave
and for Christopher Simpson this is dave
emery saying thanks for listening